boom
it was an epic space explosion that made
scientists hair stand on end
when they discovered it in february 2020
its size and power are enormous even by
cosmic standards
we set our destination to a group of
galaxies in the giraffe constellation
if our rockets could fly at the speed of
light as fast as it takes the light from
the bulb in your lamp to reach your eye
when you switch it on
zoom instant it'd take 2.6 billion years
to get where this explosion occurred in
space
2.6 billion years a lot's happened in
that time here on earth
that long ago dinosaurs weren't even
around yet
primordial life was just leaving the
ocean and heading on land
well we're traveling faster than the
speed of light
and we reach our destination ground zero
for a boom
so big it'd be like 600 million suns
exploding simultaneously and our sun is
massive to begin with
it could fit one million earths inside
in fact 99.8 percent of the stuff that
makes up our entire solar system
is the sun alone the remaining 0.2
percent
is all the planets moons asteroids and
other random cosmic bodies floating
around our star
and here's the real kicker this burst
lasted 100 million
years that's from today's digital world
with smartphones and self-driving cars
all the way back to dinosaur times so
what set off this space boom of epic
proportions
a black hole what else this monster
swallowed so much substance
that it choked and shot out a bunch of
plasma beams
they cut through space and formed a
cosmic wasteland
all around the site it was thought to be
the biggest explosion in the universe
but sooner or later every record gets
broken
we head to another galaxy cluster this
one
dubbed offi yucas an explosion thundered
in
it five times more powerful than the one
in the giraffe
it was so big you could easily line 15
milky ways across its blast area
mind you our galaxy is over 100 000
light years across
and home to 200 billion stars yeah
whoa is right it was the largest space
blast since the big bang
that started it all 13.8 billion years
ago so what was the source of this blast
to answer that we'll need a simple
analogy
just like on earth space sort of has its
own
mega cities these new yorks and tokyo's
of the cosmos are
massive and that word doesn't even do it
justice
but i tried they're officially called
super clusters of galaxies at the center
of the most
mega huge ones you'll find a super
massive black hole
now scientists still don't know much
about them but the theory goes
that they're essentially a whole bunch
of stuff or
matter that gets squeezed into a teeny
tiny point
that can't even be measured because it's
infinitely small
yeah complicated stuff think of it this
way
it'd be like taking the entire earth and
shrinking it down to the size of a grain
of rice
that grain of rice would still weigh the
same as the planet
all that stuff would just be really
squished together
so more matter equals more gravity
meaning a black hole's pole is
unescapably
strong not even light can get past it
hence the whole black part of its name
funny thing is we can't even see them
with our eyes
black holes don't glow or reflect light
they just swallow it up like spaghetti
ah makes me hungry just thinking about
it but back to epic space things that go
boom
a super massive black hole exploded in
this office super cluster of galaxies
this monster stopped pulling and
everything around it like black holes
usually do
quite the opposite it started spewing
stuff out
a colossal stream of plasma ripped
through space
almost at the speed of light and broke
through a bubble
1.5 million light years across
every thousandth of a second it was like
20 billion megatons of tnt went off
and continued doing that for 240
million years but now
i draw your attention to the heavyweight
of the milky way
it's the toughest guy in the galaxy a
super massive black hole called
sagittarius a star the mass of this
beast
is 4 million times that of the sun and
you'll like this
it's only 25 000 light years from our
home planet
in space terms this thing is pretty much
like our neighbor two houses down the
street
wait don't worry no need to pack up and
move
our neighbor has given up his old
business of shooting hot jets into space
but in 2019 he did make astronomers
hearts
skip a beat near this sagittarius a-star
they noticed a flash that was 75 times
higher than normal
their theories one the hole swallowed up
part of a star that found itself
wandering way too close for comfort
or two a gas cloud crashed into it
after a 14 hour spike in activity
sagittarius a star
finally calmed down
but in the past this giant was quick
tempered and knew how to light
space up 3.5 million years ago
our very ancient ancestors as in they
weren't technically human yet
were already walking across africa
innocently unaware of a cataclysm
happening far off in the sky above them
it looked like a beacon
that suddenly turned on and shot out two
cone-shaped beams
the whole thing was triggered by a
hydrogen cloud 100
000 times more massive than the sun it
came too close
and sagittarius a star reacted
those jets of plasma cut through space
for 200 000 light years
they didn't stop for another 300 000
years
that's the snap of a finger on the
cosmic scale but astronomers
still find traces of that boom even
today
[Music]
neutron stars also know how to set off
some fierce fireworks
they appear after giant stars run out of
fuel
and collapse in on themselves imagine
the entire sun getting squished down
into the size of a small
city yep that makes neutron stars
incredibly dense and heavy
one teaspoon of their matter weighs
around 10 million
tons they spin extremely fast
hundreds of full rotations a second and
for some of them
they shoot out energy beams from the
poles making it look like a cosmic
lighthouse
one of the most interesting neutron
stars is in the constellation
sagittarius
like black holes it has powerful gravity
and pulls in tons of matter
this all collects in a massive rotating
disc
this particular one was powered by
hydrogen from a nearby star
it gulped up its neighbor taking in so
much matter that it started heating up
the result a gigantic fireball launched
from its surface
astronomers witnessed this on august
20th 2019.
they saw a 20-second flash that lit up
space
it was the brightest burst nasa has ever
seen
the star spent more energy on it than
the sun produces
in over a week but of course
nothing beats the biggest boom of them
all the one that brought life to our
entire universe
according to the most popular theory but
first
a little backstory scientists say only
five percent of the universe is stars
planets
asteroids comets dust clouds you
me your chinchilla all life basically
all the stuff you can see with your own
eyes
so what can the remaining 95 be
the mysterious and dubious sounding dark
energy
and dark matter in simple terms
they're like the yin and yang of space
dark matter makes things attract to each
other with gravity
it's the glue of our universe keeping
everything together
dark energy does the opposite it makes
things repel
and grow further apart so the theory
goes
and weirdly enough dark energy makes
things grow further apart
the farther they are from each other
scientists can even see this for
themselves
the more distant a galaxy is the more
quickly
it's moving away from earth but those
two forces weren't always around
in fact about 13.8 billion years ago
there wasn't anything around everything
was condensed into a teeny tiny dot
that's infinitely small sound familiar
yep this mysterious forever shrinking
point
is also in the center of black holes and
it's called
a singularity it's where all our fancy
science and math breaks down
it's the most puzzling thing out there
but
one day that incredibly dense and hot
point
started to expand in all directions and
it grew faster than the speed of light
doubling its size a hundred times within
a fraction of a second
if you want the specifics it was a
hundredth of a billionth of a trillionth
of a trillionth
of a second yeah the more time passed
the faster and bigger it grew and it's
been expanding since
like blowing up a balloon that never
pops scientists called this expansion
the big bang